CS124 at Harvard
category: school; date: 13/7/2023;

I'm generally of the opinion that the best way to learn things is
to be thrown in the deep end. When I was in like 4th grade I was pretty
decent at piano, but no where near great. The thing was, one of my friends
was learning the Kreutzer Sonata on the violin and I thought it'd be cool
if I could accompany him. The Kreutzer Sonata is an incredibly difficult
piece that wasn't really suited for 12 year old me, but that didn't stop
me. I very slowly learned (the first ~8 mins/~35 of) the piece and that
experience I believe took me from being *okay* at piano to being pretty
good.

I took Data Structures and Algorithms at Harvard in my Junior year of
highschool and it was pretty brutal.

### I've told this story before
in fact I wrote my common app essay about it. It's definitely one of
if not the most pivitol moments in my CS carrer at least thus far. It's
definitely a story of throwing myself in the deep end, considering until
that point the most difficult CS class I had taken until then was APCS
in my Freshman year.

I didn't go into it thinking like that though--up until this point there
hadn't been a single algorithm I could think of that I couldn't implement
with relative ease, though that's more a testament to the difficulty of
code I had been writing rather than my own skill as a programmer. The
first homework assignment I did manage to complete on my own, but honestly
every single one of the subsequent assignments I completed with my fiend
who was taking the class with me, [Pratyush](https://www.psvenk.com/).

## prim's algorithm
The first thing to pose a hurdle was the first of three programming assignments.
We had to first randomly generate a graph in 1D, 2D, 3D and 4D coordinate
spaces in the unit... space? Unit line, unit square, unit cube and unit
hypercube respectively. We would then run a minimum spanning tree algorithm on it--your choice of 
[Prim's](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prim%27s_algorithm) or
[Kruskal's](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/kruskals-minimum-spanning-tree-algorithm-greedy-algo-2/).
I chose Prim's and was off to the races. We were advised to use a fast language
since we would be running the MST algorithm on 2^18 points. I chose C. I did not know C.

### learning C
Until that point all my experience had been with higher-level, object
oriented languages. It was almost comical how out of my depth I was at first.
When I was creating the min-heap I tried doing it by creating a variable-length
array where I would just reallocate the entire array every time I modified the
length (lol) and then wondered why it was taking 3 years to run on 1024 points.

This was all happening in the span of two weeks, by the way, while I was also
balancing two APs and Linear Algebra at Harvard as well. I don't think I could
do this now--I feel like highschoolers have almost a limitless tolerance for
sleep deprivation.

### writing the algorithm
My first try at the algorithm was essentially to directly transcribe
the pseudocode into C. I would go through every edge in E and if either the
first or second vertex in E was the same as the vertex from extract_min
and also wasn’t visited, it would update the dist of the new vertex and add
it to the heap.

Once this version of Prim’s algorithm worked for smaller values, I went
to slightly higher values. It preformed devastatingly bad at anything above
100. This is because my runtime was absolutely abhorrent. I was doing
`O(n^2)` iterations through the edges, and `O(n)` for every insert, since I was
calling realloc each time I inserted onto the heap which I later realized
was an `O(n)` function.

I'm going to skip most of the optimizations because I eventually hammered it
into shape as far as time-complexity goes, bringing it down to the `O(n log n)`
that it's supposed to be. I got it working for up to 2^17 points, albeit very
slowly.

I believe the slowdown came from the ram being completely used at all times. At
this point I realized it would take 134GB of ram to be able to store `n(n+1)/2`
edges as doubles so I had to look towards alternate solutions for storing the
edges.

At that point, I believed I had two option:
- Ignore certain edges
- Calculuate edge distances on the fly

I didn't really like the former because for whatever reason I was convinced
I couldn't represent the graph as an adjacency matrix anymore which would 
make accesses `O(n)` which would be a no-go

The latter would actually work because computers are very fast at doing simple
calculations. My only issue was that this wouldn't work with a 1-dimensional
graph because you couldn't translate that into a coordinate plane, so instead
of actually calculating a real distance I'd just generate it randomly lol. This
is legitimately working code.

```C
double get_distance(const double *vertices, unsigned int p1, unsigned int p2, int dim) {
  if (dim == 0) return drand48();
  double total = 0;
  for (int i = 0; i < dim; i++) {
    double difference = vertices[dim*p1+i] - vertices[dim*p2+i];
    total += difference * difference;
  }
  return sqrtl(total);
}
```

After all that I brought it down to a space complexity of `O(n)`. Once I got all
this fixed I realized my heap code was completely broken and so fast forwards another
day or two and I've finally got something that I believe is working perfectly

### of course it wasn't working perfectly
What more would you expect? I knew what the correct result should be for this project,
it should be ~1.2 as the number of points approaches infinity for dimension 0. It was
not--it was always some small factor of 0.0002620

See, until now I had been writing all my code on Windows. I used [Cygwin](https://www.cygwin.com/)
to compile C. See, `rand()` on windows returns a value from `0` to `2^15-1` (15 btis),
which I would then divide `RAND_MAX` to get my double between 0 and 1. The
issue was, with massive amounts of points came massive chances to roll
incredibly small distances. This resulted in the minimum distance found
by the MST algorithm to be 0 or close to it (most likely `1/(2^15-1)`) for 
each edge it selects.

While now I know I could get a better random by bitwise or-ing a bunch
of `rand()`s together, but at the time I had barely two weeks of experience
in C and didn't even know what bitwise operators were. Today I'd do it something like this:
```C
double num = (rand() << 32 | rand() << 16 | rand()) / 1 << 48;
```

But back then I didn't know I could even do that. My one saving grace
was that I read on a forum somewhere that I could get 48 random bits with
`drand48()`, but I couldn't seem to get that on Windows. So naturally
with like 2 days left before the deadline, at 10:00PM I'm dual-booting
my laptop with ubuntu.

I replaced the code and it worked. It was as simple as changing my entire
operating system. I ended up getting a 97/100, which is basically a perfect
score since the extra 3pts were for completely wowing the instructors with
something incredibly unique. And I wasn't complaining

## Everything else
I really don't feel like condensing an entire semester into a single markdown 
file, but the general trend was I slightly overperformed on the programming
assignments and slightly underperformed on the homeworks. It's like that to
this day, actually--I'm generally better at implementing the algorithms than
creating them, but I can proudly say I'm a little better at the acedemic bit
now than in my Junior year of highschool.

In the end I got a B- which didn't count towards my highschool GPA (though
it probably wouldn't have made too much of a difference seeing as I had a
pretty bad GPA my Freshman and Sophomore years anyways) and honestly that's
about all I could ask for

This class definitely made it easier for me to coast through my Frehsman
classes at UMass Amherst, since CS187 was basically just "this is what 
a hashmap is", and CS250, while significantly more difficult, had a lot
of the content already covered by CS124 minus all the programming
assignments so I was definietly able to cruise for most of the class
(except for the bit where I got a 65 on one of the midterms before regrade
requests, where I proceeded to fill out a regrade request for basically
every single question I got points off on, and got 26 points back bringing
it up to a 91, but that's a story for another markdown file).

## generic conclusion paragraph
This class was not only the first class I actually found crushingly difficult
basically ever. I've gotten Bs in classes before and tried hard in classes
before, but until that point I'd never gotten a bad grade in a class I actually
tried in (and I don't think I have since?). It felt pretty great, to be honest.
Don't get me wrong I definitely hated it in the moment and if I could have, like,
fast forwarded thorugh it, I definitely would have. But it's not that moment, huh.
Sucks to be me two years ago lol, massive L for junior year me